Consequently, the traditional authority of both elders and warriors was adversely affected. They, however, were subject to the authority of the elders. First, the traditional difference based on age, between the elders and warriors, was disturbed, though First did not break down entirely. The elders formed the ruling group and met in periodic councils to decide on the affairs of the community and settle disputes. The loss of the finest grazing lands and water resources created pressure on the small area of land that the Maasai were confined within. With the onset of the monsoon the Dhangars left the Konkan and the coastal areas with their flocks and returned to their settlements on the dry plateau. In winter, when the high mountains were covered with snow, pastures lived with their herds in the low hills of the Siwalik range. The number of cattle heads the pass had and the amount of tax the pass paid was entered on the pass. The warriors consisted of younger people, mainly responsible for the protection of the tribe. On the way the low hills stopped once again in the villages of Lahul and Spiti, reaping their summer harvest and sowing their winter crop. By the end of colonial rule the situation had reversed. To administer the affairs of the Maasai, the British introduced a series of measures that had important implications. In the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas. They appointed chiefs of different sub-groups of Maasai, who were made responsible for the affairs of the tribe. Several households crossed the Pir Panjal passes and entered the valley of Kashmir. Only buffaloes liked the swampy, wet conditions of the coastal areas during the monsoon months. With the onset of summer, the snow melted and the mountainsides were lush green. After 1947, the camel and sheep herding Raikas, for instance, could no longer move into Sindh and graze their camels on the banks of the Indus, as their camels had done earlier. In the decades between the 1850s and 1880s the right to collect the tax was auctioned out to contractors. Pastoralists could no longer remain in an area even if forage was available, the grass was succulent and the undergrowth in the forest was ample. Unlike the mountain pastoralists, the monsoon was not the cold and the snow that defined the seasonal rhythms of their movement: rather the monsoon was the alternation of the monsoon and dry season. This in turn created a further shortage of forage for animals and the deterioration of animal stock. This pattern of cyclical movement between summer and winter pastures was typical of many pastoral communities of the Himalayas, including the Bhotiyas, Sherpas and Kinnauris. pastoralists change the paths of their annual movement, reduce their cattle numbers, press for rights to enter new areas, exert political pressure on the government for relief, subsidy and other forms of support and demand a right in the management of forests and water resources. As the area of grazing lands shrank, the adverse effect of the droughts increased in intensity. When pasturelands in one place was closed to them, Many poor pastoralists changed the direction of their movement, reduced the size of the herd, combined pastoral activity with other forms of income and adapted to the changes in the modern world. The frequent bad years led to a steady decline of the animal stock of the pastoralists. One of the problems the Maasais have faced is the continuous loss of their grazing lands. Pastoral Nomads and their Movements In the Mountains Even today the Gujjar Bakarwals of Jammu and Kashmir are great herders of goat and sheep. In just two years of severe drought, 1933 and 1934, over half the cattle in the Maasai Reserve died. When the snow melted and the high passes were clear, many of them moved on to higher mountain meadows. In a different area of the mountains, the Gaddi shepherds of Himachal Pradesh had a similar cycle of seasonal movement. Land revenue was one of the main sources of its finance. After a march of about a month the Dhangars reached the Konkan. Subsequently, the best grazing lands were gradually taken over for white settlement and the Maasai were pushed into a small area in south Kenya and north Tanzania. This is the time that the fields need manure that the animals provide. In times of war and famine, the poor pastoralists lost nearly everything. In the dry season the mountain pastoralists moved to the coastal tracts, and left when the rains came. Some of them were made headmen of villages in the newly cleared areas. The social changes in Maasai society occurred at two levels. The Kurumas and Kurubas lived near the woods, cultivated small patches of land, engaged in a variety of petty trades and took care of their herds. The timing of their entry and departure was specified, and the number of days their movements could spend in the forest was limited. The Dhangar shepherds stayed in the central plateau of Maharashtra during the monsoon. Their grazing grounds shrank, their movements were regulated, and the revenue the herds had to pay increased. So expansion of cultivation inevitably meant the decline of pastures and a problem for pastoralists. The tax per head of cattle went up rapidly and the system of collection was made increasingly efficient. But the life history of the poor pastoralists who depended only on their livestock was different. Environmentalists and economists have increasingly come to recognise that pastoral nomadism is a form of life that is perfectly suited to many hilly and dry regions of the world. Many of them were originally from Jammu and came to the UP hills in the nineteenth century in search of good pastures. To enter a grazing tract, a cattle herder had to show the pass and pay the tax. But from the colonial period, the Maasai were bound down to a fixed area, confined within a reserve, and prohibited from moving in search of pastures. Young men came to be recognised as members of the warrior class when members proved their manliness by raiding the cattle of other pastoral groups and participating in wars. Conclusion So we see that pastoral communities in different parts of the world are affected in a variety of different ways by changes in the modern world. During the monsoons, the Raikas of Barmer, Jaisalmer, Jodhpur and Bikaner stayed in their home villages, where pasture was available. When restrictions were imposed on pastoral movements, grazing lands came to be continuously used and the quality of patures declined. these pastoral groups had to set up a relationship with farmers on the way, so that the herds could graze in harvested fields and manure the soil. Continuous grazing within a small area inevitably meant a deterioration of the quality of pastures. By the 1880s the government began collecting taxes directly from the pastoralists. From the mid-nineteenth century, Waste Land Rules were enacted in various parts of the country. 
New laws and new borders affect the patterns of their movement. Like the Maasai, other pastoral groups were also forced to live within the confines of special reserves. These chiefs managed to survive the devastations of war and drought. Many ecologists believe that in dry regions and in the mountains, pastoralism is still ecologically the most viable form of life. Raiding was important in a society where cattle was wealth. Dhangar flocks manured the fields and fed on the stubble. In many other parts of the world, new laws and settlement patterns forced pastoral communities to alter their lives. The herds trampled over the saplings and munched away the shoots. The warriors defended the community and organised cattle raids. these pastoral groups combined a range of different activities – cultivation, trade, and herding – to make their living. its revenue collection was seen as ‘waste land’ that needed to be brought under cultivation. White settlers and European colonists saw pastoralists as dangerous and savage – people with whom all contact had to be minimised. Through these Acts some forests which produced commercially valuable timber like deodar or sal were declared ‘Reserved’. Pastoralism in Africa Let us move to Africa where over half the world’s pastoral population lives. Other forests were classified as ‘Protected’. One group of Raikas – known as the Maru (desert) Raikas – herded camels and another group reared sheep and goat. In pre-colonial times Maasai society was divided into two social categories – elders and warriors. Further to the east, in Garhwal and Kumaon, the Gujjar cattle herders came down to the dry forests of the bhabar in the winter, and went up to the high meadows – the bugyals – in summer. Pastoralists are not relics of the past. Those found guilty of disobeying the rules were severely punished. All of them had to adjust to seasonal changes and make effective use of available pastures in different places. The colonial officials believed that grazing destroyed the saplings and young shoots of trees that germinated on the forest floor. Like pastoralists in India, the lives of African pastoralists have changed dramatically over the colonial and post-colonial periods. of Maasai grazing land. Similarly, the reservation of forests meant that shepherds and cattle herders could no longer freely pasture their cattle in the forests. By April the low hills moved north and spent the summer in Lahul and Spiti. After the kharif harvest was cut at this time, the fields had to be fertilised and made ready for the rabi harvest. Raiding is through raids that the power of different pastoral groups was asserted. The boundaries of these reserves became the limits within which The Borders could now move. In 1871, the colonial government in India passed the Criminal Tribes Act. These contractors tried to extract as high a tax as Pastoralists could to recover the money Pastoralists had paid to the state and earn as much profit as Pastoralists could within the year. On the Plateaus, Plains and Deserts Not all pastoralists operated in the mountains. Since cattle could not shift their cattle to places where pastures were available, large numbers of Maasai cattle died of starvation and disease in these years of drought. Such a population was easy to identify and control. these pastoral groups had to judge how long the herds could stay in one area, and know where these grazing grounds could find water and pasture. First, the colonial state wanted to transform all grazing lands into cultivated farms. Pastoralists were not allowed to enter these reserves; Pastoralists could neither hunt animals nor graze their herds in these areas. From the late nineteenth century, the British colonial government in east Africa also encouraged local peasant communities to expand cultivation. Their wives and children stayed back in the villages to look after the animals. Fourth, to expand its revenue income, the colonial government looked for every possible source of taxation. The chiefs appointed by the colonial government often accumulated wealth over time. From the late nineteenth century, the colonial government began imposing various restrictions on their mobility. The colonial government wanted to rule over a settled population. The Konkani peasants also gave supplies of rice which the shepherds took back to the plateau where grain was scarce. In pre-colonial times, the Maasai pastoralists had dominated their agricultural neighbours both economically and politically. When Pastures Dry Drought affects the life of pastoralists everywhere. An enquiry in 1930 showed that the Maasai in Kenya possessed 720,000 cattle, 820,000 sheep and 171,000 donkeys. How did the life of pastoralists change under colonial rule? The new territorial boundaries and restrictions imposed on them suddenly changed the lives of pastoralists. Pastoralists distrusted mobile craftsmen and traders who hawked their goods in villages, and pastoralists who changed their places of residence every season, moving in search of good pastures for their herds. Large areas of grazing land were also turned into game reserves like the Maasai Mara and Samburu National Park in Kenya and Serengeti Park in Tanzania. these pastoral groups needed to calculate the timing of their movements, and ensure that these grazing grounds could move through different territories. Not All were Equally Affected In Maasailand, as elsewhere in Africa, not all pastoralists were equally affected by the changes in the colonial period. By end September the Bakarwals were on the move again, this time on their downward journey, back to their winter base. These pastoral movements allowed time for the natural restoration of vegetation growth. Each of them was given a pass. Most often, the poor pastoralists did not have the resources to tide over bad times. As pasturelands disappeared under the plough, the existing animal stock had to feed on whatever grazing land remained. Colonial Rule and Pastoral Life Under colonial rule, the life of pastoralists changed dramatically. This adversely affected both their pastoral and trading activities. How Did these Changes Affect the Lives of Pastoralists? By October, when these grazing grounds were dry and exhausted, these grazing grounds moved out in search of other pasture and water, and returned again during the next monsoon. These Forest Acts changed the lives of pastoralists. Second, a new distinction between the wealthy and poor pastoralists developed. By this Act many communities of craftsmen, traders and pastoralists were classified as Criminal Tribes. pastures were cut off from the best grazing lands and forced to live within a semi-arid tract prone to frequent droughts. Gradually, over the decades, pastures established themselves in the area, and moved annually between their summer and winter grazing grounds. The rainfall in the region was meagre and uncertain. Next April, once again, the low hills began their march with their goats and sheep, to the summer meadows. These measures led to a serious shortage of pastures. This led to continuous intensive grazing of these pastures. Third, British officials were suspicious of nomadic people. By the end of April pastures began their northern march for their summer grazing grounds. So the Raikas combined cultivation with pastoralism. When grazing lands were taken over and turned into cultivated fields, the available area of pastureland declined. They were to be found in the villages of Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. They too spent their winter in the low hills of Siwalik range, grazing their flocks in scrub forests. Some reduced the number of cattle in their herds, since there was not enough pasture to feed large numbers. Plains and Deserts were also to be found in the plateaus, plains and deserts of India. Before colonial times, Maasailand stretched over a vast area from north Kenya to the steppes of northern Tanzania. The British imposed various restrictions on raiding and warfare. How Did the Pastoralists Cope with these Changes? Dhangars were an important pastoral community of Maharashtra. By September the low hills began their return movement. Banjaras were yet another well-known group of graziers. So we see that the life of these pastoral groups was sustained by a careful consideration of a host of factors. Times of drought become times of crises, when cattle die in large numbers. pastoralists are not people who have no place in the modern world. The variety of grasses that sprouted provided rich nutritious forage for the animal herds. Many of them began living in towns, and became involved in trade. In the monsoon this tract became a vast grazing ground for the Dhangar flocks. In most pastoral tracts of India, grazing tax was introduced in the mid-nineteenth century. Even in the areas their movements were allowed entry, their movements were regulated. By October the Dhangars harvested their bajra and started on their move west. When the pastures were exhausted in one place The Borders moved to a different area to graze their cattle. When the pasture was exhausted or unusable in one place they moved their herds and flock to new areas. When the high mountains were covered with snow, the herds were grazed in the low hills. They wanted the rural people to live in villages, in fixed places with fixed rights on particular fields. Then the low hills descended with their flock to their winter grazing ground on the Siwalik hills. Second, by the mid-nineteenth century, various Forest Acts were also being enacted in the different provinces. Most of them now live in the semi-arid grasslands or arid deserts where rainfed agriculture is difficult. Many of them migrated to this region in the nineteenth century in search of pastures for their animals. So their camels had to find new places to go. Pastoralists reacted to these changes in a variety of ways. Where have the Grazing Lands Gone? Feeding the cattle became a persistent problem. its revenue collection could at the same time produce more jute, cotton, wheat and other agricultural produce that were required in England. The Borders are Closed In the nineteenth century, African pastoralists could move over vast areas in search of pastures. In the late nineteenth century, European imperial powers scrambled for territorial possessions in Africa, slicing up the region into different colonies. In Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, again, the dry central plateau was covered with stone and grass, inhabited by cattle, goat and sheep herders. Underfed cattle died in large numbers during scarcities and famines. They were stated to be criminal by nature and birth. the lives had to move because the Forest Department permits that had been issued to them now ruled their lives. Over the years, some richer pastoralists began buying land and settling down, giving up their nomadic life. Most of them were shepherds, some were blanket weavers, and still others were buffalo herders. the lives needed a permit for entry. Some also earn through trade and transport, others combine pastoral activity with agriculture; still others do a variety of odd jobs to supplement their meagre and uncertain earnings from pastoralism. In search of good pastureland for their cattle, the mountain pastoralists moved over long distances, selling plough cattle and other goods to villagers in exchange for grain and fodder. a semiarid region was covered with thorny scrub. The sheep could not tolerate the wet monsoon conditions. Here the shepherds were welcomed by Konkani peasants. This was a flourishing agricultural tract with high rainfall and rich soil. This nomadism allows them to survive bad times and avoid crises. These individuals were granted various concessions and encouraged to settle these lands. These chiefs had to go looking for work in the towns. Their agricultural stock declined and their trades and crafts were adversely affected. The new political boundaries between India and Pakistan stopped their movement. The Kurumas and Kurubas reared sheep and goats and sold woven blankets. Pastoralists were also not allowed to enter the markets in white areas. And their stock was difficult to get permits without trouble and harassment. This continuous movement also allowed the pastures to recover; This continuous movement prevented their overuse. The permit specified the periods in which their movements could be legally within a forest. In most areas the lands taken over were actually grazing tracts used regularly by pastoralists. In many regions, The boundaries were prohibited from participating in any form of trade. This was a semi-arid region with low rainfall and poor soil. The Maasai lost about 60 per cent of their pre-colonial lands. their precolonial lands were confined to an arid zone with uncertain rainfall and poor pastures. Usually nomadic pastoralists grazed their animals in one area and moved to another area. Pastoralists had to pay tax on every animal Pastoralists grazed on the pastures. Other herds had to be shifted to the dry plateau at this time. Many poor pastoralists, on the other hand, borrowed money from moneylenders to survive. In the early twentieth century their population in this region was estimated to be 467,000. How did pastoral communities elsewhere cope with these changes in the modern world? the lives were now prevented from entering many forests that had earlier provided valuable forage for their cattle. With increasing restrictions on their mobility, pastoralists find First difficult to move in search of pastures. Very often these reserves were in areas that had traditionally been regular grazing grounds for Maasai herds. The chiefs had both pastoral and non-pastoral income, and could buy animals when their stock was depleted. That is why, traditionally, pastoralists are nomadic; The restrictions move from place to place. QP over 22 million Africans include communities like Bedouins, Berbers, Maasai, Somali, Boran and Turkana. In these, some customary grazing rights of pastoralists were granted but their movements were severely restricted. In 1885, Maasailand was cut into half with an international boundary between British Kenya and German Tanganyika. Even today, over 22 million Africans depend on some form of pastoral activity for their livelihood. At times they lost their cattle and sheep and became labourers, working on fields or in small towns. They had a regular income with which The chiefs could buy animals, goods and land. the affairs lent money to poor neighbours who needed cash to pay taxes. By these Rules uncultivated lands were taken over and given to select individuals. When rains fail and pastures are dry, cattle are likely to starve unless The restrictions can be moved to areas where forage is available. So tax was imposed on land, on canal water, on salt, on trade goods, and even on animals. In recent years their camels have been migrating to Haryana where sheep can graze on agricultural fields after the harvests are cut. Cutting off all links was, however, never really possible, because white colonists had to depend on black labour to bore mines and, build roads and towns. Yet, pastoralists not only continue to survive, in many regions their numbers have expanded over recent decades. To colonial officials all uncultivated land appeared to be unproductive: Land revenue produced neither revenue nor agricultural produce. Several households came together for this journey, forming what is known as a kafila. Once this Act came into force, these communities were expected to live only in notified village settlements. As pasture lands disappear grazing becomes a problem, while pastures that remain deteriorate through continuous over grazing. The lucky could get more regular work in road or building construction. The boundaries were not allowed to move out with their stock without special permits. The Serengeti National Park, for instance, was created over 14,760 km. Such changes were not experienced only by pastoral communities in India. Some eked out a living as charcoal burners, others did odd jobs. Others discovered new pastures when movement to old grazing grounds became difficult. Nothing but dry crops like bajra could be sown here. If their movements overstayed their movements were liable to fines. Earlier, pastoralists not only looked after animal herds but traded in various products. As cultivation expanded, pasturelands were turned into cultivated fields. The restrictions under colonial rule did not entirely stop their trading activities but they were now subject to various restrictions. QP over 22 million Africans raise cattle, camels, goats, sheep and donkeys; and cattle   camels   goats   sheep and donkeys sell milk, meat, animal skin and wool. Those who were settled were seen as peaceable and law abiding; those who were nomadic were considered to be criminal. The dry scrub forests here provided pasture for their herds. Modern Yet, pastoralists do adapt to new times. By expanding cultivation Land revenue could increase its revenue collection. many communities were not allowed to move out without a permit. Some became settled peasants cultivating land, others took to more extensive trading. The village police kept a continuous watch on them. Over vast stretches no crop could be grown. On cultivated land, harvests fluctuated every year. No pastoralist was allowed access to these forests. This prevented new trees from growing. The Gollas herded cattle. How? Fodder was always in short supply. 